Android Basics with Compose

Android Basics with Compose is a self-paced, online course on how to build Android apps using the latest best practices. It covers the basics of building apps with Jetpack Compose, the recommended toolkit for building user interfaces on Android.



Unit 1: Your first Android app
3 pathways | Duration: 10 hours

Learn programming basics and create your first Android app. Write simple Kotlin programs that display text output. Download and install Android Studio. Build an Android app with a simple user interface that displays text and images. Run the app on a device or emulator.



Unit 2: Building app UI
3 pathways | Duration: 21 hours

Continue learning the fundamentals of Kotlin, and start building more interactive apps.
Use conditionals, function types, classes, and lambda expressions in Kotlin.
Understand how composition and recomposition works.
Add a button to an app UI and respond to user taps.
Create an app that works with data entered by the user.
Learn how to use state to display data and reflect the changes automatically when the data gets updated.
Write unit tests to test isolated functions.
 


Unit 3: Display lists and use Material Design
3 Pathways | Duration: 15 hours

Build apps that display a list of data and learn how to make your apps more beautiful with Material Design.
Use data classes, functions, and collections in Kotlin.
Create a scrollable list in an app that displays both text and images.
Add click listeners to interact with list items.
Add an app bar to the app and modify the app theme.
Use Material Design to build modern and intuitive user interfaces, using colors, shapes and typography.



Unit 4: Navigation and app architecture
3 pathways | Duration: 27 hours

Learn the best practices of app architecture to build more complex apps. Enhance your users' ability to navigate across, into and back out from the various screens within your app for a consistent and predictable user experience.
Explain activities and their lifecycles.
Understand Modern Android architecture.
Use StateFlow and UDF pattern to work with state and events.
Add a ViewModel to save data and state.
Set up and use the Navigation component with Compose.
Understand what responsive UI is.
Use window class sizes to build for different screen sizes.
Add a navigation drawer to an app.
 


Unit 5: Connect to the internet
2 Pathways | Duration: 14 hours

Use Kotlin coroutines to perform multiple tasks at once, and learn about HTTP and REST to get data from the internet using Retrofit. Then use the Coil library to display images in your app.
Describe the basics of concurrency and how to use coroutines in an Android app.
Define and understand the data layer in Modern Android app architecture.
Implement a repository to centralize data access.
Use Retrofit to retrieve data from a remote server.
Load and display images using the Coil library.
Implement dependency injection to decouple the classes, making it easier to test, maintain, and scale the app.
 


Unit 6: Data persistence
3 Pathways | Duration: 10 hours

Learn how to store data locally on the device and keep your apps working through any network disruptions for a smooth and consistent user experience.
Learn the basics of SQL to insert, update, and delete data from a SQLite database.
Use the Room library to add a database to an Android app.
Use Database Inspector to test and debug database issues.
Use Preference DataStore to store user preferences.

 

Unit 7: WorkManager
1 Pathway | Duration: 6 hours

Use Android Jetpack's WorkManager API to schedule necessary background work, such as data backups or fresh content downloads, that keeps running even if the app exits or the device restarts.
Define long running tasks that need to run in background work.
Add WorkManager to an Android app.
Create a Worker object and enqueue work.
Create constraints on WorkRequests.
Use the Background Task Inspector to inspect and debug WorkManager.



Unit 8: Views and Compose
2 Pathways | Duration: 4 hours

Learn how to use Compose and the older UI toolkit based on Views side-by-side in the same app. In this unit, you will learn interoperability APIs and best practices to add a new feature to an existing app in Views, use an existing library that uses Views, or use a UI component that is not yet available in Compose.
Understand the View-based UI toolkit and build app UI using XML.
Add a composable in an app built with Views.
Add Navigation component to the app and use it to navigate between fragments.
Use AndroidView to display views.
Add existing View-based UI components in a Compose app.